---
layout: post
usemathjax: true 
title: "Triple Difference - Why Triple?"
date: 2020-07-20
---

## Triple Difference: A bicycle program for girls in India


In my [previous blogpost](https://brittarude.github.io/blog/2020/07/18/britta-rude-revisiting-difference-in-difference) I talked about the famous Difference-in-Difference strategy, and new insights about it. 
To understand what the Triple-Difference estimate is about, let's have a look at another nice paper by [Muralidharan and Prakash (2017)](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20160004). 
They study the impact of providing girls with bicycles on secondary school enrollment. 
The program was only implemented in the Indian state of Bihar. We can then apply a Difference-in-Difference strategy using girls of the neighboring state Jharkhand as a control group (Jharkhand was part of Bihar for over 50 years and is therefore considered a quite good control state). 
But we can even go further, and compare the difference in secondary enrollment between girls across both states before and after the introduction of the bycicle program in Bihar to the same difference between boys across both states before and after the provision of bycicles to girls in Bihar. 
This is then our third difference, leading us to the so-called Triple-Difference estimation strategy. Why is it convenient to apply this Difference-in-Difference-in-Difference strategy? 
The Triple-Difference strategy can be helpful when our famous parallel trend assumption is violated. 
In the paper by [Muralidharan and Prakash (2017)](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20160004) the parallel trend assumption does not hold, as the bicycle program was introduced in a time of rapid growth and a sharp increase in public spending for education in the state of Bihar. 
This is not the case for the control state Jharkhand. Neither does the parallel trend assumption hold when we compare boys and girls within the steate of Bihar. The triple-difference strategy solves both problems. 

## Summing up: Three differences

To some up, we have three differences in the paper

a) Our first difference: Secondary enrollment between female cohorts affected by the program in the state of Bihar (girls aged 14 or 15 (our treatment cohort) versus girls aged 16 to 17 (our control cohort)). But what about possible confounders that changes within Bihar during the same time that our bicycle program was rolled out? We control for this by introducing:

b) Our second difference: Secondary enrollment between male cohorts of the same age (boys aged 14 or 15 and boys aged 16 and 17). They are good control groups as they have been exposed to the same changes that took place within Bihar across time as girls, without having been eligible for the program. 
Still, we have a large difference in levels, and as explained in one of my [previous blogpost](https://brittarude.github.io/blog/2020/07/18/britta-rude-revisiting-difference-in-difference) this could be problematic to our identification strategy. 
Probably, as their secondary enrollment was much lower, the growth in secondary enrollment was much higher for girls than boys. 
The authors test for parallel trends in secondary enrollment for the years am (2002-2003 to 2005-2006) and reject the parallel trend assumption. Therefore, they introduce: 

c) Our third difference: This means, comparing the double difference generated by a) and b) in the state of Bihar to the same double difference in the control state  of Jharkhand. 
They again test for parallel trends of the triple difference, and do not reject it. Problem solved. 


